The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fern Bulletin, April 1912, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Fern Bulletin, April 1912
       A Quarterly Devoted to Ferns

Author: Various

Editor: Willard N. Clute

Release Date: June 5, 2018 [EBook #57280]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FERN BULLETIN, APRIL 1912 ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                          _Vol. XX_    _No. 2_




                                  _The
                             Fern Bulletin_


                     _A Quarterly Devoted to Ferns_


                                _April_


                             _Joliet, Ill.
                      Willard N. Clute & Company_
                                  1912

    [Illustration: The Fern Bulletin: A QUARTERLY DEVOTED TO FERNS]

             _AWARDED GRAND PRIZE AT THE PARIS EXPOSITION_
                  _25 Cents a Copy_    _$1.00 a Year_
                        WILLARD N. CLUTE, EDITOR

To insure subscribers against loss of one or more numbers between the
expiration and renewal of their subscriptions the journal will be sent
until ordered stopped. All arrearages must be paid. Remittances may be
made by money order, stamps, currency or drafts and personal checks
drawn on Chicago or New York. Checks on other banks must contain 10
cents for collection.

          WILLARD N. CLUTE & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS, JOLIET, ILL.

 Entered at the Post Office, Joliet, Ill., as second-class mail matter


                          60 YEARS’ EXPERIENCE

                                Patents
                              Trade Marks
                                Designs
                             Copyrights &c.

Anyone sending a sketch and description may quickly ascertain our
opinion free whether an invention is probably patentable. Communications
strictly confidential. HANDBOOK on Patents sent free. Oldest agency for
securing patents.

Patents taken through Munn & Co. receive _special notice_, without
charge, in the

                         _Scientific American._

A handsomely Illustrated weekly. Largest circulation of any scientific
journal. Terms, $3 a year; four months, $1. Sold by all newsdealers.

                   MUNN & Co. 361 Broadway, New York
               Branch Office, 626 F St. Washington, D.C.


                               VOLUME VI
                              Out of Print

It is not likely that there will be any more “last appearances” of
Volume VI. The best we can do now is to begin with volume VII. We offer
the next 13 volumes (7-19) for $9.00 and will present to each purchaser
a copy of 10 year index, Boston Meeting Papers and Ferns of Upper
Susquehanna as well as 3 different numbers of Vol. VI. Single volumes 75
cents.

                        WILLARD N. CLUTE & CO.,
                              Joliet, Ill.


                           SOME SPECIAL OFFERS

  THIS MAGAZINE ONE YEAR
  With any back volume later than Vol. 9                          $1.25
  With any two back volumes later than Vol. 9                      1.60
  With set of the Fern Bulletin (Vols. 7-18)                       8.00
  With the New Gray’s Manual ($2.50)                               3.00
  With a Solid Steel Trowel, 8-in. blade, (40c)                    1.00
  With any Book or Magazine for 50c additional.

  N. B.—Above prices are for subscriptions strictly in advance. Personal
  checks will not be accepted unless cost of collection is added.

                         Address all orders to
                         WILLARD N. CLUTE & CO.
                            JOLIET, ILLINOIS

    [Illustration: GYMNOGRAMMA LANCEOLATA]




                                CONTENTS


  The Fern Flora of Illinois                                           32
      Ophioglossaceae                                                  35
      Osmundaceae                                                      35
      Polypodiaceae                                                    36
      Salviniaceae                                                     40
      Equisetaceae                                                     40
      Lycopodiaceae                                                    41
      Salaginellaceae                                                  41
      Isoetaceae                                                       42
  A Problematical Fern (Gymnogramma lanceolata)                        42
  The Tall Spleenworts                                                 45
  Further Notes on Variation in Botrychium Ramosum                     47
  Rare Forms of Fernworts—XXII                                         48
      Still Another Christmas Fern                                     48
      Polystichum acrostichoides f. Gravesii                           49
  Notes on Various Ferns                                               51
  Schizaea Pusilla at Home                                             53
  Pteridographia                                                       55
  Index to Recent Literature                                           60
  Editorial                                                            61
  Book Notes                                                           62

                                 THE FERN BULLETIN
    Vol. XX                      APRIL, 1912                        No. 2




                      THE FERN FLORA OF ILLINOIS.


                             By E. J. Hill.

The state of Illinois has an area of about 55,000 square miles. It lies
between the parallels 37° and 42° 30′, thus giving a length of 5½° or
about 380 miles. This north and south extension produces a milder
climate in the southern part, but no fern of essentially southern
distribution comes in except _Polypodium polypodioides_, though the two
quill-worts of the state are perhaps better placed under this head also.
It is the lowest of the north-central states in average altitude, the
mean above sea level being about 600 feet, varying from 300 feet at the
junction of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to 1250 feet at the
Wisconsin line in the extreme northwest part. As there is nothing in
these extremes of elevation to effect material changes of temperature
due to altitude, its floristic features are not much modified in respect
of this. Anything of this character must be ascribed to local
conditions, not general causes. Another factor that affects its
floristic features is the dominance of prairie within its boundary, the
forests and woodlands, sometimes very narrow strips, chiefly bordering
its streams and lakes. Since lands covered with grass are not adapted to
the growth of ferns, and consequently are limited in species, their
number and variety must be much restricted for this reason. This must
have been the case in the primitive condition of the prairies before
they were so generally taken up for cultivation. The loss in the
original fern-flora is slight in this regard when compared with that of
flowering plants. As nearly all of the state is in the region of the
glacial drift, the soil is influenced by this condition also. The
ravines cut in the drift and in the underlying rock where it is reached,
with their varying degrees of moisture and shade, show the greatest
variety in fern-life, though a greater abundance of certain kinds may be
found in woods and swamps. The prevailing rocks are limestone, but
sandstones occur in some localities, especially along the Illinois and
Rock rivers. These in some parts of the state, particularly in the coal
measures, the area of which is large, may be interstratified with shales
and slate. These rocks and the soils resulting from their disintegration
and decomposition, taken in connection with those of the glacial drift,
provide a fair range of edaphic conditions for the growth of ferns. It
is evident that such as prefer a calcareous soil will be best
represented, if any preference of this kind inheres in their nature.

It will be seen from the list that not quite one half (56) of the
Pteridophytes accorded specific rank in “Gray’s New Manual of Botany”
(115) are reported from this state. The genera are represented in larger
proportion, 23 of the 31 given, or if _Athyrium_ be separated, 24 of 32,
or three-fourths of them. All the species of several of the smaller
genera are found, up to three in the case of _Osmunda_, but all of none
with species exceeding this number. The genus most fully represented is
_Equisetum_, eight of the ten, or nine of eleven when _E. robustum_ is
given specific rank. To these must be added _E. Ferrissii_, not in the
Manual.

Reliable data for the distribution of the ferns of the state are not
very full. It is hoped that they may be made more complete by the
co-operation of those into whose hands the list may fall. Many additions
to the number of species can hardly be expected. Doubtless the state has
been quite well explored in this respect. I find only two to add to
those published by Patterson in 1876, _Isoetes Butleri_, described in
1878 from specimens found in Indian Territory (Oklahoma) but since found
in this state, and _Equisetum Ferrissii_, a recent addition. The list is
mainly a compilation made at the request of the editor of the _Fern
Bulletin_. No special fitness for the task is claimed, since my personal
knowledge of the region covered is almost wholly confined to five of the
northeastern counties, Kankakee, Will, Cook, Dupage and Lake. Only
casual trips of slight duration have been made to other places. The
publication most relied on for the state at large is the “Catalogue of
the Phaenogamous and vascular cryptogamous plants of Illinois,” H. N.
Patterson, Oquauka, Ill., 1876. His catalogue of plants growing in the
immediate vicinity of Oquauka has also been used. Friedrich Brendel’s
“Flora Peoriana, Budapest, 1882,” (the German edition, but since given
in English, I believe) has furnished some definite information for a
district around the city of Peoria. The floras of H. H. Babcock and of
Higley and Raddin for Chicago and vicinity have likewise been consulted,
but as they respect territory mainly familiar to the writer, could be
cited but little.

As explanatory of the plan followed I may state that I have first
mentioned the localities or stations with which I am personally
acquainted, and from which examples are in my herbarium unless very
common throughout. Citations from Patterson’s catalogue for the state at
large are entered in quotation marks followed by (P.). Where Peoria is
given the authority is Brendel, where Oquauka, Patterson. A few have
been furnished by V. H. Chase, who collected in Stark county and
vicinity, and by Prof. Atwell of the Northwestern University, from data
in the herbarium of the University.


                            OPHIOGLOSSACEAE.

Ophioglossum vulgatum (L.) “Wabash county, a single plant.” _Schneck._
      (P.) Probably elsewhere, but easily overlooked.

Botrychium obliquum (Muhl.) In open woods, Cook Co., rare. “S. Illinois.
      _Vasey_, _Schneck_.” (P.) Peoria Co., _V. H. Chase_. Starved Rock.
      _J. H. Ferriss._

Botrychium obliquum dissectum. (Spreng.) Peoria Co., _V. H. Chase_.

Botrychium virginianum. (L.) Common in rich woods in the northeastern
      part of the state, and probably throughout. It often occurs in
      colonies, sometimes of a dozen or more plants. In woods along Lake
      Michigan it readies a height of two feet.

